---
title: "Publications"
permalink: /publications/
toc: false
---

## Machine learning for Gravitational Wave Data Analysis

### Nested sampling with normalising flows for gravitational-wave inference

M. J. Williams, J. Veitch, C, Messenger\
[arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.11056) [journal](https://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevD.103.103006)


<details>
  <summary><b>Abstract</b></summary>

  We present a novel method for sampling iso-likelihood contours in nested sampling using a type of machine learning algorithm known as normalizing flows and incorporate it into our sampler nessai. nessai is designed for problems where computing the likelihood is computationally expensive and therefore the cost of training a normalizing flow is offset by the overall reduction in the number of likelihood evaluations. We validate our sampler on 128 simulated gravitational wave signals from compact binary coalescence and show that it produces unbiased estimates of the system parameters. Subsequently, we compare our results to those obtained with dynesty and find good agreement between the computed log-evidences while requiring 2.07 times fewer likelihood evaluations. We also highlight how the likelihood evaluation can be parallelized in nessai without any modifications to the algorithm. Finally, we outline diagnostics included in nessai and how these can be used to tune the sampler’s settings.

</details>


### Generalised gravitational burst generation with Generative Adversarial Networks

J. McGinn, C. Messenger, I. S. Heng, M. J. Williams\
[arxiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.01641) [journal](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6382/ac09cc)


<details>
  <summary><b>Abstract</b></summary>
  We introduce the use of conditional generative adversarial networks (CGANs) for generalised gravitational wave (GW) burst generation in the time domain. Generative adversarial networks are generative machine learning models that produce new data based on the features of the training data set. We condition the network on five classes of time-series signals that are often used to characterise GW burst searches: sine-Gaussian, ringdown, white noise burst, Gaussian pulse and binary black hole merger. We show that the model can replicate the features of these standard signal classes and, in addition, produce generalised burst signals through interpolation and class mixing. We also present an example application where a convolutional neural network (CNN) classifier is trained on burst signals generated by our CGAN. We show that a CNN classifier trained only on the standard five signal classes has a poorer detection efficiency than a CNN classifier trained on a population of generalised burst signals drawn from the combined signal class space.
</details>
